Sitcoms are bad, but they’re not dangerous. Neither is most of what makes you flinch.
So you need to stop defending yourself. Focus your energy on the fight that matters.
Your world has a safety net. You aren’t in freefall, and you never will be. You treat
mistakes as final, but they almost never are. Pain and scars are a part of the path, but
so is getting back up, and getting up is easier than ever.
Still feel like you’re in danger? Look at it this way. Early man’s lifespan was about 35
years. If you got injured, you were done. No modern medicine, so each encounter
meant blood loss, infection, or death. You can’t relate to this. Your lifespan is double
that. Science and technology mean you can survive almost anything. It may be
expensive to do so, but that’s still a significant improvement over death from an infected
cut.
But despite this safety net, your flinch is still there, in the back of your brain—still a
goalie, but a goalie for things that are nowhere near as dangerous as they used to be.
Think of a bear. You see it, and you react, instantly. You know how to deal because
your brain is built to help you survive it: you run, jump, fight, or hide. But that’s not the
world you’re in, so instead, flinching happens at job interviews or when you’re asking a
girl to the prom. Those things get magnified. Your privileged-world problems become
the bear, and you treat them that way.
What these encounters have in common with bears is that they’re changes in the status
quo. This used to mean danger, so that’s how your flinch reflex sees them. It attempts
to stop the changes from happening, using the same fight-or-flight mechanism it always
has.
So your heart starts beating fast. Your palms get moist. Time distorts. Not for bears, but
for hard conversations and quitting your job. But that reaction is backwards. You don’t
need adrenaline to get through those things—you just need to do them. Crossing these
obstacles will put the flinch in its place.
Your flinch has become your worst enemy. It should be a summoning, a challenge to
push forward. Instead, the challenge is getting refused.
Listen: new does not mean bears anymore. The world is changing faster than ever.
Now, new means business. If you refuse to face the flinch, it means the fear is choking you.